
# Chapter 1 

Political Activity:
Individuls or groups trying to influence collectived decisions, lobbying, etc.

### Power:

The ability t oachieve an objective by influencing the beahvior of others.
Not equally distributed, some groups of factions more successfull than others.

#### Collective action problems.
Political Power not only the product of ones skill in mobilizing resources, the
structure of authory also important.

### Political Power can be exerted:
- Coercian (Fear or threats)
- Inducements (Offering a reward, bribe or prid quo pro)
- Persuasion (The use of information, trurthfl or propaganda) to encourage
  or maniuplate behavior
- Leadership ('Follow my lead')
    
### Stephen Lukes 3 faces of Power:
- Deciding on a particular issues
- Agenda, the power to discuss certain things and not others (a decision
  can not be renderd if something is a non-issue, aka absent from the
  political agenda)
- Manipulating perceived self-interest, the ability to dtermine the
  dominate ideas in society. Make people think they want something. 
  False consciousness

### Authority & Legitamacy:
- If even legitamately elected goverments are persisntely ineffective the
  entire system itself may lose legitmacy in the eyes of the poepl. 
- Max Weber's three types of authority:
    - Charaismatc, based on personal qualities of the leader.
    - Traditional. Based on customs establishing the right to rule
      (Monarchs, under the guise of a divine right)
    - Legal-rational. Based on legal rules and procedures. Power vested in 
      impersonal positions within the system i.e Prime Minister or
      President.

### The Common Good:
- What's best for the community as a whole?
    -Individualist Perspective: Argues that humans will act in self
    interest
    -PLuralism: Theory that the system involves many different groups
    putting demans on gov , which attempt to satisfy as many groups as
    possible.


### What's Poli Sci
- There's:
    - Empirical Analysis: explaining various aspects of politics by
      obersation and comparison to evelop generalizations.
    - Normative ANalysis: Examining ideas about how the community should be 
      governed and what should be pursued.
    - Policy Analysis: Evaluating existing policies and assessing possible
      alternatives. What's wrong with current policies and how can we
      improve


### The Modern State:
- Not the same as government. Far more extensive, ecompasses govermnet,
  law, order, security, military, politice, crown corporations and the
  court, Bank of Canada. Hand in regulating the economy, health and welfare
- How much the state should do is a heated debate. Conservatism vs
  Liberals.

### Soverignty:
- The principle that the state is the highest authority for their
  population, and not subjet to external authority.
- Does not answer to a "worl government", no listen to anyone else
- All states are legally 'equal' in their soverignty.
- Soverign states have grown exponentially since WW2

### Development of Soverighnty:
- Wasn't alwasy like this. Used to be huge swaths of land rules by royals
  nad monarchs who did what they wanted (wars, made deals). They were
  typically related and all spoke the same lang, whereas the peasants
  sometimes spoke another language. The royals themselves were however
  subjet to teh authortiy of the church. The fuedal system.
- As fedualism broke down different monarchs compteted to be the highest
  authority in certain areas, limiting hurchs' influence. This is waht the
  Thirty YEars war was about (Who was the most in charge?) 

### Development of Soverighnty:
- Wasn't alwasy like this. Used to be huge swaths of land rules by royals
  nad monarchs who did what they wanted (wars, made deals). They were
  typically related and all spoke the same lang, whereas the peasants
  sometimes spoke another language. The royals themselves were however
  subjet to teh authortiy of the church. The fuedal system, 
- The monarch was the one who was soverign, not the territory. The land was
  the monarchs to do waht tehy wanted, not the country or the peoples.
  Wars were fought between Germans and Frenchmen, not by Germany and
  France. There were ideas of regions but not countries.
  War made the state and the state made War.

### Monarchy Decline:
- Eventually Monarch was challenged, Glorious Revolution and French
  Revolution pushed them out and with the INdustraial Revolution and
  capitalism things really got moving.

### Modern State:
- Soviergnty no longer resides in an individual, it is an impersonal abstrat
  authorty from any person or persons.

### Nationalism:


### Globalism:


# Chapter 5: Political Culture

### Political Culture:
- The fundamental political values, beliefs nad orientations that are widely
held within a political community.
- Not the same as political ideology. Culture is also the norms and
traditions

### West vs Rest:

- Rising prosperity, liberal/individual freedom and political culture?
- Hypothesized that things are moving towards a liberal democracy and
  capitalism, and that there may be less division and a convergence.
- Chinese Alternative:
    - Rising prosperity but a 5,000 year tradition
    - Potential alternative model 
    - Collectivist political culture (the whole is more important then the
      individual)

### Ideological Perspectives:
- One way of describing the political culture of a political community is in
  terms of it's dominant ideological perspective:
    - America: Classical liberal
    - Sweden: Democratic socialist
    - China: Confucian/Communist
    - Canada: ?
- Theorists offer different explanations for the differences between Canadian
  and American political culture:
    - Louis Hartz: "Fragments" Theory, a fragment of European systems of
      government were the distinct political culture of immigrants to Canada.
    - Tory Touch: During the American Revolution, those who were loyalist to
      Great Britain and did not want to break away came to Canada out of
      loyalty
    - Seymour Lipset: We had different historical experiences. The Americans
      fought for revolution whereas we did not.

### Malaise (Attitudes on the decline):
- Political efficacy: The belief that indivudlas can have an impact on
  political decisions and that government is responsive to wants.
- Public confidence and trust in governmnet has declined in almost all advanced
  democratic countries in recent decades.
- Nothing worse than a 'politician'
- Why?
    - Scandals, broken promises
    - Mass media, alternative sources for information
    - More educated public
    - Income inequality
    - Governments declining capacity to satisfy citizen needs

### Political Interest
- Fairly small minority of Western countries care and or are interested in
  politics.
- Political knowledge is generally low, many people are knowledgable about the
  political issues important to them
- From a 2004 poll, 33% of Canadians knew the name of the opposition leader, 60% lacked the basic
  knowledge of immigration policy. The majority does not know major parties
  positions on important issues.

## Political Participation, Socialization & Culture:

### Democratic Political Culture:
- Parochial: People unaware of political system and politics. (i.e people
  in a far off village, consumed by day-to-day life with no concept or
  interest in a far away government.)
- If too many people are aware and involved in government, it overburdens the
  government and instability may result from too many demands being placed on
  it.
- They call the hybrid that balances participation with inactvity is a civic
  culture
- Others argue that active participation is an essential feature of democracy


### Political Participation
- Majorty participate at least to the extent of voting in elections.
- Turnouts have declined in many democratic countries
    - 2015 in Canada was an exception.
- Countries with proportional representation systems tend to haver higher voter
  turnout than those using single member plurality systems.
- Mobilization by well-organized political parties, countries with high levels
  of activity, close elections and signifcant differences in parties all boost
  turnout
- Other types of participation include working or volunteering for a party or candidate, membership with a party (which is decreasing).
- Special-interest groups and protesting have been increasing even if voting
  and political participation isn't. 

### Youth Participation
- Youth much less likely to vote, but more likely to discuss politics, be
  active in protests 
- Why is turnout so low?
    - Life cycle effect: The effect of one's age on attitude and behaviour
    - Generational effect: The effect of attitudes and behavior of the views of
      different generations that persist throughout the lifecycle.

### Who Participates? 
-  Higher educated, higher income and professional occuppations are more likely
   to engage politically.
- Women are slightly more likely to vote but less likely to be involved in
  higher-level political activities 

### Political Socialization 
- The processes by which the values, attitudes and beliefs of the culture
  transmitted to mebers of the political community
- Agents of socialization include family, peer groups, education systems, the
  media, religious organizations, the military, unions, and the workplace.
- The process of political socialization through family is more complicated,
  less straightforward as a transmission and can even backfire.

### State Directed Socialization
- Education as a source of patriotic socalziation has emerged in recent years
  (Singing the anthem) pledging allegiance to create shared experiences in
  order to better integrate units in society, help prevent isolated units who
  turn to radicalism or extremism

### Postmaterialism
- Theory that non-material values such as freedom, participation, quality of
  life and the environment are given greater priority by those who didn't
  experience WWII 

## Moving forward
- In addition to postmaterialism, other contributing factors include the
  development of post-industrial, knowledge-based economy, greater access to
  higher education and means of mass-communcation
- New style of citizen politics: greater activism, the questioning of authority
